Presenting JS-Waku (#33)
vacp2p/vacp2p.github.io: _posts/2021-05-21-js-waku.md

2021-05-21-js-waku.md---
layout: post

> name:  "Presenting JS-Waku"

Reviewer: JS-Waku: Waku v2 in the browser

title:  "Presenting JS-Waku"
date:   2021-05-21 12:00:00 +0800
author: franck
published: true
permalink: /2021-05-21-js-waku
categories: platform

> summary: "Presenting JS-Waku"

Reviewer: Summary describe

Author: How is this summary used?

Reviewer: Twitter card preview

discuss: 
---

After almost three months working on JS-Waku,
we thought it would be a good time to give it a proper introduction.

<!-- Waku v2 is built for Status and Ethereum ecosystem -->

First, let's review what is Waku v2.

Waku v2 comes from a need to have a more scalable, better optimised solution for the Status app to achieve decentralised
communications on resource restricted devices (ie, phones).
We see the need of such solution in the broader Ethereum ecosystem, beyond Status.
This is why are building Waku v2 as a decentralised communication platform for all to use and build on.
If you want to read more about Waku v2 and what it aims to achieve,
checkout [What's the Plan for Waku v2?](/waku-v2-plan).

> 

Reviewer: Briefly mention Whisper/Waku v1 Devp2p, libp2p as enabler for web resource restricted

<!-- present waku v2 ecosystem pre js-waku, ie, wakunode2 -->

> 

Reviewer: mention poc before but limited etc

also h/t previous bridge js-murmur

Author: What was murmur about? why was a devp2p and libp2p bridge needed?

Reviewer: PoC for status in browser, to bridge whisper (devp2p) with libp2p

Reviewer: I'd just link to it briefly

Since last year, we have been busy defining and implementing Waku v2 protocols in [nim-waku](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku),
from which you can build [wakunode2](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku#wakunode).
Wakunode2 is an adaptive and modular Waku v2 node,
it allows users to run their own node and use the Waku v2 protocols they need.
The nim-waku project doubles as a library, that can be used to add Waku v2 support to native applications.

<!-- present the gap js-waku is trying to fill -->

We believe that dApps and wallets can benefit from the Waku network in several ways.
For some dApps, it may make sense to enable peer-to-peer communications.
For others, machine-to-machine communications could be a great asset.
For example, in the case of a DAO with a governance token,
Waku could be used for [gas-less polling](https://twitter.com/ethstatus/status/1293963402705018881?s=20).
Enabling the DAO to notify their users of a new poll, and users to vote without interacting with the blockchain.

<!-- explain how js-waku is filling the gap -->

> 

Reviewer: resource restricted environment, zoom back, browser is one such example but also mostly offlnie etc

For this to happen, we need to give developers a library which is easy integrate in their dApps:
[JS-Waku](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku).

<!-- explain what we have achieved so far: more on the journey? -->

> 

Reviewer: also mention websockets etc

As it is written in TypeScript, types are included in the npm package to allow easy integration with TypeScript, ClojureScript and other typed languages that compile to JavaScript.

Key Waku v2 protocols are already available:
[message](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/), [store](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/), [relay](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/11/) and [light push](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/19/),
enabling your dApp to:

- Send and receive near-instant messages on the Waku network (relay),
- Query nodes for messages that may have been missed, e.g. due to poor cellular network (store),
- Send messages with confirmations (light push).

We focused the past month on developing a [ReactJS Chat App](https://status-im.github.io/js-waku/).
The aim was to create enough building blocks in JS-Waku to enable this showcase web app.
Most of the focus was on getting familiar with both the Waku v2 [RFCs](https://rfc.vac.dev/)
and the [js-libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p) library that we heavily rely on.
Soon, we will [use it daily for dogfooding](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/399) purposes.

JS-Waku is the second implementation of Waku v2 protocol,

> so a lot of effort on interoperability was needed.

Reviewer: this helped us solidity specs and implementations

Reviewer: specific examples

For example, to ensure compatibility with the nim-waku reference implementation,
we run our [tests against wakunode2](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/blob/90c90dea11dfd1277f530cf5d683fb92992fe141/src/lib/waku_relay/index.spec.ts#L137) as part of the CI.

As we built the [web chat app](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/tree/main/examples/web-chat),
we were able to fine tune the API to provide a simple and succinct interface.
You can start a node, connect to other nodes and send a message in less than ten lines of code:

> 

Reviewer: API exampe section

Author: There is a JS code example just below. What else would you want to include?

Reviewer: at second read, that might be good enough

```javascript
import { Waku } from 'js-waku';

const waku = await Waku.create({});

const nodes = await getStatusFleetNodes();
await Promise.all(nodes.map((addr) => waku.dial(addr)));

const msg = WakuMessage.fromUtf8String("Here is a message!", "my-cool-app")
await waku.relay.send(msg);
```

As more developers use JS-Waku, we will evolve the API to allow for more custom and fine-tune usage of the network
while preserving this out of the box experience.

> <!-- explain what is next for js-waku -->

Reviewer: mention hackathon

Next, we are directing our attention towards [Developer Experience](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/issues/68).
We already have [documentation](https://www.npmjs.com/package/js-waku) available but we want to provide more:
[Tutorials](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/issues/56), various examples and showing how [JS-Waku can be used with Web3](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/issues/72).

> 

Reviewer: wallet usage and dapps usage

Reviewer: take some sections from previous talk / roadmap etc

Reviewer: web3js/ethers integration possibly

<!-- explain where can people use js-waku -->
<!-- explain how people can help: use it or even propose ideas -->
<!-- mention JD -->

If you are as excited as us by JS-Waku, why not building a dApp with it?
You can find documentation on the [npmjs page](https://www.npmjs.com/package/js-waku).

Even better, you can simply join us in building JS-Waku as we are currently have a position open:
[js-waku: Wallet & Dapp Integration Developer](https://status.im/our_team/jobs.html?gh_jid=3157894).

Whether you are a developer, you can come chat with us on Discord [#waku (core development)](https://discord.gg/uWbdCmFU) or [#waku-support (dev support)](https://discord.gg/VChNsDdj) (soon to be migrated to Waku!).
If you have any ideas on how Waku could enable a specific dapp or use case, do share, we are always keen to hear it.

> 

Reviewer: JD CTA

> 2021-05-21-js-waku.md---

Reviewer: --- seems misplaced

layout: post

> name:  "Presenting JS-Waku: Waku v2 in the browser"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name:  "Presenting JS-Waku: Waku v2 in the Browser"
```

Reviewer: https://titlecase.com/

title:  "Presenting JS-Waku: Waku v2 in the browser"

> date:   2021-05-21 12:00:00 +0800

Reviewer: I'd set it for Friday

author: franck

> published: true

Reviewer: Missing image - important for Twitter preview

Screenshot of chat app or similar seems fine

> permalink: /2021-05-21-js-waku

Reviewer: Wrong format, see how we do it in other places. `/js-waku` or so seems reasonable.

Also date should be updated

categories: platform

> summary: "We are summarizing the Waku v2 status, introducing JS-Waku, what we achieved so far and what is next."

Reviewer: This will show up as a twitter card preview, not very enticing and descriptive which may limit reach. Focus on running in the browser etc. This post is also not really summarizing Waku v2 status in more global terms, that's another post.

> discuss: 

Reviewer: Make sure this is added later

Author: how is it used? I could not find the link (when published on the web page) on previous posts

Author: What I meant is: Why does this field needs to be filled?
I can now see that a text at the bottom of the post is automatically added to point to discuss. will sort it.

---

> After almost three months working on JS-Waku,

Reviewer: Needs a better intro, running in browser, leading into it. No one knows what JS Waku is initially.

Something like "one of the problems of ... running in browser allows ... this lead to ..."

we thought it would be a good time to give it a proper introduction.

## Waku v2

> First, let's review what is Waku v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's review what Waku v2 is and what problem it is trying to solve.
```

Waku v2 comes from a need to have a more scalable, better optimised solution for the Status app to achieve decentralised

> communications on resource restricted devices (ie, phones).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communications on resource restricted devices (i.e., mobile phones).
```

The Status chat feature was initially built over Whisper.
However, Whisper has a number of caveats which makes it inefficient for mobile phones.
For example, with Whisper, all devices are receiving all messages which is not ideal for limited data plans.

To remediate this, a Waku mode (then Waku v1), based on devp2p, was introduced.

> To further enable web and restricted resource devices, Waku v2 has been created based on libp2p.

Reviewer: resource restricted environments

encompasses browser, mobile etc

> To further enable web and restricted resource devices, Waku v2 has been created based on libp2p.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To further enable web and restricted resource devices, Waku v2 was created based on libp2p.
```

and other comment

This is why are building Waku v2 as a decentralised communication platform for all to use and build on.
If you want to read more about Waku v2 and what it aims to achieve,
checkout [What's the Plan for Waku v2?](/waku-v2-plan).

Since last year, we have been busy defining and implementing Waku v2 protocols in [nim-waku](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku),
from which you can build [wakunode2](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku#wakunode).
Wakunode2 is an adaptive and modular Waku v2 node,
it allows users to run their own node and use the Waku v2 protocols they need.
The nim-waku project doubles as a library, that can be used to add Waku v2 support to native applications.

## Waku v2 in the browser

We believe that dApps and wallets can benefit from the Waku network in several ways.
For some dApps, it makes sense to enable peer-to-peer communications.
For others, machine-to-machine communications would be a great asset.
For example, in the case of a DAO,
Waku could be used for gas-less voting.
Enabling the DAO to notify their users of a new vote,
and users to vote without interacting with the blockchain and spending gas.

> [Murmur](https://github.com/status-im/murmur) was the first attempt to bring Waku to the browser,

Reviewer: Whisper to the browser, acting as a bridge between devp2p and libp2p

acting as a bridge between Whisper and Waku.

> Then, a web chat [POC](https://github.com/vacp2p/waku-web-chat) was created to demonstrate the potential of Waku v2

Reviewer: Once Waku v2 was started and there was a native implementation on top of libp2p, this proof of concept was craeted

in web environment.
It showed how using js-libp2p with few modifications enabled access to the Waku v2 network.
There was still some unresolved challenges.
For example, nim-waku only support TCP connections which are not supported by browser applications.
Hence, to connect to other node, the POC was connecting to a NodeJS proxy application using websockets,
which in turn could connect to wakunode2 via TCP. 

However, to enable dApp and Wallet developers to easily integrate Waku in their product,
we need to give them a library that is easy to use and works out of the box:
introducing [JS-Waku](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku).

JS-Waku is a JavaScript library that allows your dApp, wallet or other web app to interact with the Waku v2 network.

> It is available right now on [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/js-waku): `npm install js-waku`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is available right now on [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/js-waku):

`npm install js-waku`.
```

fix discrepancies between specs and nim-waku
([#418](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/418), [#419](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/419))
and fix small nim-waku & nim-libp2p bugs
([#411](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/411), [#439](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/439)).

To fully access the waku network, JS-Waku needs to enable web apps to connect to nim-waku nodes.
A standard way to do so is using secure websockets as it is not possible to connect directly to a TCP port from the browser.
Unfortunately websocket support is not yet available in [nim-libp2p](https://github.com/status-im/nim-libp2p/issues/407) so 
we ended up deploying [websockify](https://github.com/novnc/websockify) alongside wakunode2 instances.

As we built the [web chat app](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/tree/main/examples/web-chat),
we were able to fine tune the API to provide a simple and succinct interface.
You can start a node, connect to other nodes and send a message in less than ten lines of code:

```javascript
import { Waku } from 'js-waku';

const waku = await Waku.create({});

> const nodes = await getStatusFleetNodes();

Reviewer: side note but I don't think we want to hardcode Status functions stuff here, this should be a static file that you load where it being hosted by Status is an implementation detail.

Author: Would the static file be in the js-waku repo? what would it contain?
I expect to have a more generic discovery method once we progress in this area. I believe for the sake of transparency it was best to clarify in the API name that we connect to Status nodes.
